Blumenstock makes clear in his article that there is great potential with the use of data science to help people in developing countries. He describes the promise which big data 
has shown in helping not only people in developing countries have more access to financial resources but also those facing natural disasters. Since so many people now have access 
to mobile phones, data can be gathered from their use of apps and websites. This data has transformed access to loans as algorithms can produce a credit score for people who do 
not have access to traditional loans. This data can also be used to identify impoverished people or neighborhoods. An example of this was identifying thatched roofs from 
satellite imagery. Additionally, it can provide information on which neighborhoods were hit hardest by an epidemic or natural disaster which allows for a targeted response.

Next, Blumenstock goes on to describe the pitfalls which arise when using these tools. There are certain unanticipated effects of the previous implementations. For example, the 
digital loans being provided may be predatory in nature and results in many people losing money or being unable to take a bank loan because of missing payments. There is evidence 
that many people are not fully aware of the risk they are taking. Blumenstock cites a 2015 study which found that only 51% of Rwandan borrowers were aware of the interest rate 
being charged. This also extends to the risk of abuse of the technology by authoritarian regimes. In China, they can prevent travel based on social credit scores, and those who 
commit financial wrongdoings will have a much lower score. The flaws in new approaches to data collection have not been thoroughly tested and there is risk they will be deployed 
before they are fully understood. An algorithm may perform better at certain times than others. There is also the incentive to game the system. When a humanitarian aid 
organization used satellite imagery to find people living in thatched roofs, many people began to pretend to live in thatched structures. Data can be skewed in favor of the 
wealthier portion of developing countries. This is due to them having more access to mobile phones and digital services. Engaging with social media requires some literacy and 
there is a much higher chance of wealthy individuals having access to education. These last two examples illustrate the idea that just having “good intent” is not enough to 
combat the situation. There are many factors at play and without fully understanding the deeper context of a situation, funds which should be going to those in need never reach 
them. Developing nations do not have the necessary regulations nor ways to enforce existing regulations on abuses of power in issues of data privacy and accountability. This 
allows for private companies, whose sole goal is maximizing profits, to have free reign. Another issue which extends from this is the lack of transparency in the algorithms used. 

Finally, Blumenstock suggests ways in which progress can be made to find solutions to these issues. New approaches to data collection should be used simultaneously with 
conventional methods to validate the data sets. This allows for a much more accurate picture of the situation being studied. Customization is needed when transitioning core 
technology, which is generally used for first world applications, towards a more practical use such as identifying areas of poverty from satellite imagery. Additionally, 
Blumenstock believes that opening more avenues for collaboration to data scientists and other sectors which deal with international problems will allow for more focused and 
beneficial. He also encourages the development of technical capacity in local communities in developing countries.
 	
The use of machine learning in data interpretation is a delicate balancing act between people’s right to privacy and transparency, private interests, and the need to find 
solutions to problems facing the global community. 
